>> So welcome to the prospective unit
of week five in which we integrated
all the chips that we built before
into a full blown computer system.
And during this week, we discussed
two different computer architectures.
The Von Neumann architecture and
the Harvard architecture.
So perhaps, we can start the, perspective
unit by asking Neumann to summarize for
us the main architectural differences
between Von Neumann and Harvard.
>> Well, in the, in our Hack computer,
we had to separate,
read-only memory for the program and the
separate data memory that was read-write.
Separating between these two
different memories is sometimes
called the Harvard architecture and
which I tend to view as just a flavor,
if you wish of Von Neumann architecture.
In a classic Von Neumann architecture,
you have a single memory that contains
both the data and the program.
As we explained in the second unit of this
week doing it the classical way has a tiny
complication that you need to
separately fetch an instruction,
that is access a program instruction.
And separately at a different
time at the next cycle,
execute the program which to, which to
required for a, accessing the data memory.
In our Harvard architecture, we had
the program in a separate memory unit.
Basically, we could do both of them in a
single cycle, which made it a bit simpler.
Now this architecture, as is,
is probably a very appropriate for
sometimes what's called embedded
computers, where for computer does
a single thing that was pre-programmed
to it and just put in to ROM.
A general purpose computer in which you
want to keep on changing the program that
you run, you would probably need the full,
real Von Neumann architecture.
The differences are not that big
between these two architectures,
as we saw in a unit two of this week and
we chose to take the simplest one.
Again, keeping with the simplicity
of our whole approach.
>> So normally, if I understood your
explanation one implication from Harvard
to Von Neumann architecture is that in
Von Neumann, we expect the computer to do
different things at different cycles or
different points of time.
So, is there some organized
way in computer science to
to model this this different
behavior of computers?
>> Absolutely.
The standard way of doing it is via
the formalism of the finite machine.
A specification of the different things
that the computer is supposed to do at
different times steps and
how we're supposed to move
from one statement to another.
Let me demonstrate.
Okay.
So the idea is that for
every possible state that the machine
can be in, you have a type of circle and
you have arrows between the different,
different circles or
between the different states
of the machine that tell you,
from which state do you move
to which other state and why.
In each state, you can write what are the
kind of thing that the machine needs to do
in that situation.
For example, maybe in this state, you want
to add one to the program counter and
maybe you want a certain
address to get a certain value.
For example, the value from
the memory address, address by n.
And so, on every different state,
you can write this information
in terms of the state.
This gives you a very clear picture of
what needs to be done in every possible
state and where,
what kind of state do you move for, do you
move to after everything that happened?
For example, you may move from here
to here, if the clock if the current
clock cycle changed or if the current
memory location has value zero.
Or various other situations, that are,
can be found in the Harvard.
The values of the different
hardware logic.
So, once you specify this and this kind of
way formalism in this kind of finite state
machine formalism, now we can translate
this to the normal registers and
combinatorial logics that we already know.
The trick would be to simply add
another register that is called state.
A register that will encode in which
one of these cycles are we in.
In our situation, we'll need 2 bits
to encode three possible states.
So we'll have here 2 bits.
Once we have this state register,
now we can write combinatoty logics that
basically affects everything that we need.
So for example, if the 2 bits this is just
a register is has 2 bits going in and
2 bits going out.
But all the combinatorial logic that we
have can also accept the state as part of
its input.
Like it accepts counter and so on.
Different combinatorial parts of our
computer, accepts various inputs.
Now they also have this input, the state.
And of course, they can do different
things according to the different state,
including deciding what
the next state is going to be.
Again, it's a function
of the current state and
all the other hardware
signals in the computer.
So the way you translate from this
formalism from the finite state machine
formalism to this actual implementation
is pretty straight forward.
And and oh, completely technical,
if you wish.
Once you actually coded everything,
it's just like you organized
hardware previously.
And that's an organized way to design
computers that do different things
in different times and
move between the different times and
different states in an organized manner.
>> One question that typically comes up
when we teach this part of the course
is that the Hack computer can
interact with a keyboard and screen.
And the question is what does it
take to connect a computer to more
peripheral devices you know,
in addition to a keyboard and a screen?
So indeed,
real computers have many peripheral
units which are the screen, the keyboard,
a mouse, a microphone,
a disk and so on so forth.
And also this architecture is scalable.
We can add more devices as we please and
the question in there is
how can you possibly do it?
Well just like we did with the screen and
the keyboard,
we can allocate memory space to represent
every one of these peripheral devices.
And when we want to write something, for
instance when we want to sound something
on the microphone or
write something to the disk,
we can write into memory certain codes
that are later later, will be translated
into physical signals that actually
operate these peripheral devices.
But at some point, when you add
several such peripheral devices,
the CPU becomes extremely overloaded.
Because the poor CPU has to
not only run your program, but
also manage all these peripheral devices.
So the typical approach is to offload
the CPU from all this headache and
use what is known as device controllers.
So typically, when you add,
for example, a disk.
The disk will be equipped with device
controller, which is a dedicated hardware,
which knows how to manage the disk, which
knows how to translate operations from
what the CPU wants to do to actual
movements of the disk an, and so on.
And something like this happens
with every particular I/O device.
And for example, take the screen.
In the, Hack platform, the screen is
managed in a very simplistic way.
When you want to turn on and
off a pixel, you simply turn on and
off a bit in memory.
And you assume that at some point
this this manipulation will
be refreshed or will,
will cause the screen to be refreshed.
So the CPU is in charge for every thing.
If you want to draw a line, the CPU has to
actually write all these points all these
bits into memory and, and the line will
get drawn at a certain point of time.
In a real computer the screen comes
equipped with a graphics card or
some graphics accelerator and
this is a dedicated computer that can
do all sorts of things internally.
So if we want to draw a line
from one coordinate to another,
we can simply tell the controller go
ahead and do it and the controller will,
you know, will do everything,
which is necessary to compute, you know,
which pixels have to be turned on and
off and so on.
So, once again,
we can add many I/O devices as we please.
U, in principle, it will be very similar
to what we did with the screen and
the keyboard.
But there are numerous details involved,
which are specific to all
these different devices.